So, if you are having issues or just want to see where I'm at here, we're at 04-hooks,
where we learned about useState, by far the most common hook that you'll use.
The next we're going to talk about, the next most common hook that you're going to use,
which is useEffect.
So, state is all about statefulness in your component, things that can change over time
in your component.
This will be frequently tied to forms, but you could easily write like a clock, or something
like that.
The other thing is effects will usually be used with state as well, so they tend to combine
and compose.
But let's talk about effects.
Effects stands for side effects, so you have some component and it has something that's
going to happen outside of it.
Personally this is going to be like an API request, so you're going to go reach out to
some API, it's going to come back with data, and you'll see that.
This could be like, let's say you have something that you want to show a clock, like the date
time or something like that, you could be doing that with an effect because you can
think of time as a side effect to your component.
It's anything that's going to be inputting into your component that's not just user input
or something like that.
So let's go do that.
So make sure your API server is running because we actually are going to hit the API now.
So let's go to order.jsx, client, just make sure you have that if you don't.
And we're going to go to order.jsx, and we're going to import use effect from react.
And we have pizza, cool.
We're going to be doing some currency conversions here.
So this is now just built into the browser, which is super nice.
So let's go to order format, give it what format you want, feel free to put this in
your own locale.
I'm going to show you how to do it with dollars.
So this is currency, and I want the currency to be USD.
So we're going to load in pizza types.
So right now we just have like a flat list of all these pizza types, but I want this
to be a dynamically populated of all of our different pizzas.
I, being the generous course creator that I have, have created 32 pizza types for you.
And we're going to use all of them.
Most of them look terrible, just to be aware of that.
So const, another hook here, another use state hook.
Pizza types, set pizza types equals use state with an empty array, right?
So this is basically going to say like, start with nothing, and then we will progress from
there.
And then I'm going to have a loading hook.
This is going to be useful for that.
You can say like set loading to be true, and like we can show the user a nice spinner and
not render stuff that's not available yet.
And then once everything has loaded, you can say set loading to false, and then you can
show them whatever they need to know.
So use state, we're going to start by having the form be loading, right?
Because it won't have all the pizzas loaded yet.
Okay, cool.
Here we're going to say let price and selected pizza, we're going to say if it's not loading,
Then we're going to say selected pizza equals pizza types dot find pizza, pizza type, triple
equals pizza dot ID.
So why are we doing this?
We're going to be keeping track of just the ID of the pizza type that's been selected.
We have to go actually find inside of our array of pizza types, the correct one, and
we're going to do that by its ID.
And you notice these are not hooks despite the fact that they're mutable.
This is because it's kind of derivative state, right?
So we can use this state up here to find this state.
So this doesn't actually need to be a hook because it's not, it's always going to be
a function of these, or sorry, these are always a function of these, right?
Because the price is going to be whatever the select pizzas price is, right?
The selected pizza is always going to be the pizza type that matches in pizza types, right?
So view has this like a concept of derivative state.
I think Svelte has it as well.
Doesn't exist in React.
You just keep track of them in normal variables, okay?
So now we're guaranteed here that selected pizza is going to be the correct pizza object
that we've gotten back from our API.
We're going to write a function here called fetch pizzas, async function fetch pizzas,
pizza types rather, pizza types.
And this is just going to be a really normal fetch command.
So we're going to say const pizza res equals await fetch slash API slash pizzas const pizza
json equals await pizza res dot json.
Set pizza types to be pizza json.
And set loading to be false because we'll be done loading at that point, right?
All right, so we have this side effect function that we want to call.
Where do we call it?
I can't just say fetch pizza types here.
Why is this a bad idea?
It would run each time the component is rendered.
You got it.
It would run every single time that the component rendered.
That's a lot of, you're basically DDoSing yourself, right?
So that's not a good idea.
How can I be only like run this at the beginning, right?
That's all I only want to do it once when the component first loads, right?
Effects you found the need for effects.
This is exactly what effects are for.
Use effect, you give it a function of like, hey, I need you to do this kind of outside
of the render cycle.
So if you find that's exactly what effects are for is like, I have my renders and I have
things that need to happen outside of the renders and I want to kind of control when
that happens.
So in this case, we're going to say fetch pizza type.
This isn't still quite what we want it to do.
This is still going to schedule an effect after every single render.
So how do we tell it, hey, we only want this to change once.
There's a second parameter here of like, hey, whenever this variable is different from the
previous render, do it again.
So let's say here we put like, I don't know, pizza size.
Now every time that the user selected a different pizza size, this function would get running
and this effect would get run again.
That's not actually what we want, right?
We want it to run once, right?
Just at the beginning.
So how do we do that?
Well, we just don't give it anything, right?
We just give it an empty array, right?
And that's saying like, I don't care.
Run this once and then you're not tracking any variables here, so you're never going
to run it again.
Make sense?
You'll have to excuse like the backwards walk into like the logic there, but like usually
people see this for the first time is like, why is there an empty array there?
Right?
And they get really upset by that.
So I'm trying to walk you back into like why that empty array exists there.
It does make sense.
It's a little dense to look at, like that's a lot of syntax in one line of just curly
bracket, square bracket, square bracket, round bracket, or round parentheses, right?
It does make sense.
Okay, next question people might ask me, why can't I just make this an async function?
I think Burton, you literally just asked me this.
Async functions return what?
Promises.
They always return a promise no matter what.
If it's an async function, the return type is always a promise.
And effects, the return type matters.
I'm not going to show you anything today where it does matter, but let's say you wanted it
to run once and you wanted it to run at the end, not the beginning.
This can be useful for like clearing timeouts.
That's usually the time that I do it or canceling, like using an abort token to like cancel a
request or something like that.
You can return a function, get rid of this async.
This is how you would do that.
The return here is the cleanup function.
So all of this to say, you don't need to do that right now.
It's a fairly rare thing that you need to clean up, but that's how you would do it.
And that's why we can't just make this async, right?
That's why I bake an async function up here and then I call it for my effect.
And now I've selected pizza price.
We're now fetching all of the pizzas.
So eventually this is going to be full of pizza types here.
Now this is like one of my favorite things again about React.
By doing everything this way, I basically could just sort of like treat all of my code
down here as if pizza types already existed.
It reads very optimistically in the sense of like, I just assume that the data is going
here eventually.
And it makes the code not full of if this, then that's right.
It's usually just like read as if the code is here, right?
Let's go replace the options here.
Pizza types dot map pizza, and here we're just going to do an option key equals pizza
dot ID.
We'll do our keys here in just a second.
And value equals pizza dot ID.
And then we want pizza dot name to be down here, pizza dot name.
All right, so this is a little dense here.
Let's talk about this for just a second.
It's all concepts you know, though, between the curly braces can be any JavaScript expression
whatsoever, right?
If you're familiar with map, it's a JavaScript function that you're taking an array of something
and you're turning that into an array of something else, right?
It's just a transformation from an array of 1, 2, 3, 4, and you say map double, you'd
get 2, 4, 6, 8, right?
It would just transform one to the other.
We have an array of pizza types, and we want to transform that into an array of components,
right?
Or elements, as it were, not that that really matters.
That's all we're doing here is we're just turning an array of objects into an array
of React stuff, right?
And if you remember under the hood, like we saw, what is JSX transforming that into?
It's an array, right?
So if we give it an array of components, it knows exactly what to do with them.
So that's why map here works.
We're turning an array of these pizza objects just into an array of options.
Make sense?
We follow?
All right, so I think if we obviously there's some errors here, but I think if we refresh
this, we should see lots of pizza types, which is kind of cool, right?
So if we refresh, look here at the network, you can see here we have a I'm looking just
at XHR, which are Ajax requests here.
You can see it's hitting the API.
It's getting a response back here of all the different objects, right?
And it's turning that into an array of options.